Hey listeners, it's Ross. Interesting
times is on vacation this week, so I'm
sharing a conversation from my opinion
colleagues May Heramad and Jessica
Gross. They're chatting about the
aesthetics of MAGA femininity, the
distinctive look of figures like Christy
Gnome and Nancy Mace, and the link
between makeup and power in the Trump
administration.
It's a rich subject to say the least.
So, take a listen and we'll be back
after the holiday with a new episode of
the show. And while you're waiting
patiently, desperately, I'm hoping you
can do me a favor. Check out and
subscribe to my YouTube channel,
Interesting Times with Ross Dowet. See
you soon.
[Music]
I'm Mayer Ahmad. I'm an editor for New
York Times Opinion.
From right-wing influencers to trades,
there's an immediately recognizable
aesthetic that's easy to clock. Let's
call it MAGA beauty. It's visible
everywhere, from Tik Tok videos to White
House press briefings. And for the women
in Trump's world, that look often goes
handinhand with an aggressive approach
to politics and power. But it didn't
necessarily start with the GOP. So to
unpack the look and what it means, I'm
joined by Jessica Gross. She's a writer
for Opinion who covers family,
education, religion, and culture. And
she recently wrote a piece about this
aesthetic for her newsletter.
Jessica, thanks for joining me.
>> My pleasure. Thanks for having me.
>> So, I guess to start, I I wondered if
you could describe what the conservative
female aesthetic looks like.
>> So, it starts with so-called Utah curls,
and those were popularized by Mormon
influencers. They are usually
centerparted curls. Okay, so this is
what the hair looks like after it's been
curled. You can see the swoopy front
pieces. They're not too crazy volumized.
You can see the straight ends. The
makeup look is very heavy. It is flat
and matte. As the influencer Suzanne
Lambert told me, she is a comedian and
content creator who has made a number of
incredibly funny Tik Toks about what she
calls Republican makeup. Hey, I noticed
that all of the Republican girlies in my
comments do their makeup the exact same
gorgeous way. So, I thought that I would
try to do it myself.
>> It is often cosmetically enhanced or
appears to be cosmetically enhanced.
>> I wanted a really matte finish. It's
giving drained. It's giving dusty. We
want to make sure that it doesn't look
like we've ever used moisturizer once in
our life. Often, it is accessorized with
big old crosses. So a big cross necklace
or earrings and the clothes are always
form fitting whether they are casual or
corporate wear or cocktail dress. And
how does it stand out to you? Like I
guess in a lot of ways I feel as though
what you've described is a little bit
out of touch with the like mainstream of
what beauty standards are currently
which is more dewy minimalist like a no
makeup makeup clean girl aesthetic. It
kind of contrasts from it in a big way.
Right. Well I think it depends. I think
there are a lot of influencers who are
making money with that look. I would
call it runoff Kardashian. Um the
Kardashians themselves have moved on
from this look, the sort of heavily
makeup contoured look. And because
algorithms run on homogeneity,
I think having that look makes it easier
to go viral because it's already saying
I am part of this particular team. And
so before anything actually comes out of
their mouths, you already have an idea
of who they are and potentially what
they stand for.
>> It's like an aesthetic signal of their
politics,
>> right? And I mean to be clear, we are
all aesthetically signaling. I remember
the New York Times style section ran an
article about how all Brooklyn moms wear
number six clogs. And I was like, you
didn't need to call me out like that.
Like I'm not trying to say that I am any
different. I am responding to my own
sociological cues and the women who are
around me and I'm s we're all making
aesthetic choices when we put ourselves
out there. This is just sort of
anthropologically looking at the types
of choices that a lot of prominent
female politicians in the MAGA universe
are making.
>> And who are those prominent politicians?
Like who are the kind of like faces of
aesthetic in the Trump White House in
particular? So Christine Gnome, who is
uh the Secretary of Homeland Security,
is sort of the most prominent and
obvious choice just because she has
contrasted that particular look with an
incredibly brutal message both visually
and um the words that are coming out of
her mouth. So you know, our colleague M.
Gasson called this out as the image of
the first 100 days of the Trump
presidency was Christina standing in
front of a jail full of mostly shirtless
prisoners in El Salvador. She is heavily
made up. She is wearing a $50,000 Rolex
and uh the contrast of the
amount of care that went into her image
against the brutality of you know these
imprisoned men was obviously an image
that stays with many of us but also uh
Trump's press secretary Caroline Levitt
and um Nancy Mace who is not in the
Trump cabinet or chosen by Trump but she
is a Republican uh congresswoman from
South Carolina.
>> Yeah, I wanted to kind of like dig into
that um Christy Gnome moment a little
bit further. You know, the contrast of
her and her kind of like exaggerated
glam with the men standing behind her in
the prison. In a way, it's one of those
things where I can't imagine the man
version of it where it's like what's a
man MAGA look like? So, do you think
part of this has to do with the fact
that they're women and they're a kind of
like extra scrutiny on like how they
appear because of the fact that they're
women in politics? I do think that is
part of it. I think the image is more
provocative because it's unusual, right?
I mean, although other women have
obviously served in the role that Gnome
serves in, none have been so outspoken
or created so many press moments that
she has chosen to create. However, I do
think that the male version is probably
Elon Musk. He is wearing the baseball
cap like she's wearing. He's out here
with the chainsaw. So, I think that
there is sort of a a male version in the
manga multiverse, but I don't think it
would have been as indelible an image if
there had been a male politician in the
same role.
>> Yeah, I was thinking back to um the
comment that Vik Ramaswami made about
Nikki Haley's heels and I remember that
was something that you had discussed as
well. her kind of comeback about it was
like it's not a fashion statement, it's
for ammunition. And in a way, I'm
interested in knowing what you think
about the understanding that some of
these women have about how they're
perceived and like the kind of
decision-m that might go into how they
look. I think any woman who's in the
public eye at all has to grapple with
this. They will get comments based on
their appearance, uh, attacking their
appearance in ways that male politicians
never would. And so I think having a
sort of uniform look, whatever that look
may be, like with Hillary Clinton as the
pants suit, that is a kind of armor.
It's a kind of mask. It's a kind of way
to prevent people from talking about
what you look like if the way that you
look is the same every time. And it is a
potentially a way to get the message
across further. And so part of the
argument that I make in the piece is
that by using the sort of vernacular of
influencers, it's something familiar to
viewers of social media and it helps
them get their message across even
further than they might have otherwise.
>> Yeah. you've covered the intersection of
politics and culture for a while now and
I was curious to know how you feel like
the roots of the current conservative
beauty trend might have come about
because as you said like it's come kind
of like from a Kardashian runoff and I
think this look in particular the matte
foundation and like over accentuated
eyes that's something that I feel like
people associate with like 2016 makeup
so like I wonder why if you've thought
about like why it's become this look of
conservatism in particular
I think some of it is from southern
culture, from pageant culture. I think
some of it is it's Trump specifically
his preferred look. I mean, he famously
ran a beauty pageant, you know. So, it's
it's it is in some ways appealing to
this audience of one, which is a
prerequisite for this role. Um, but I
also think it is a way to hold
themselves in opposition to people that
they feel are not gender conforming. And
so you see it with Nancy Mace a lot. She
is often attacking trans women
specifically and holding herself
separate from them and saying, "I'm a
real woman." And so this sort of hyper
feminine look, I think, is a way to
communicate that as well.
>> Yeah, I know. It's one of those things
where I think it's kind of fascinating
and ironic that a lot of the aesthetics
of this are kind of like playing up in
um performing gender in a way that like
they're in a camp where they're like
this is what a true woman should look
like.
>> Yeah. It all feels drag adjacent. Um so
I don't know what to say. I mean it's um
the big fake eyelashes like the really
just exa it's exaggerated. But I think
part of that is also about knowing their
audience. I think they consciously know
that their images are going to be
reproduced on social media and I think
just having things be sort of
exaggerated looks better. Well, the
other thing I guess about the folks that
are um not in political power more in
the influencer side of it. You know, you
wrote a little bit about the kind of
like avenues to power and influencing
for women and like how that kind of fits
the mold of a more conservative
viewpoint of what a woman should be,
which is not in the highest positions of
power, but influencing kind of provides
this like alternative pathway to having
influence.
>> Having influence. And so when I wrote my
book about American motherhood, I have a
chapter about social media and mom
influencing. And one of the major
revelations of that chapter for me was
that in a lot of conservative
communities where women are not
encouraged to have, you know, day jobs,
to have any kind of corporate job
outside the home, influencing was the
only way for them to have a real voice
and for them to make money while still
fulfilling their communities perceived
as their real role as wives and mothers.
And so that's where a lot of paid
influencing started was in communities
like that. And so I think it is still
considered an acceptable way to make
money because again you can still look
perfectly feminine in a way that is very
conformist and in a very specific idea
of beauty and you're still at the whim
of the algorithm and at the whim of the
companies that are paying you for brand
deals. So you're not ultimately the
person who is making the decisions but
you're still making money in some way
and you still have a kind of power
particularly over other women.
>> Right. Right. There's this term being
used now the womanosphere. It's like the
woman version of the manosphere. You
wrote in your piece about Carolyn Le and
her kind of doing a video with a Tik Tok
influencer like a running influencer.
>> What is your roles and responsibilities
at the White House?
>> Yeah. My job is to relay the president's
message and his agenda and his views and
feelings to the American people through
the press. What is a quote or motto that
you live by? God is within her. She will
not fail.
>> So it seems like these kind of even the
people in position in power and white
house also kind of go handinhand with
the influencer woman part of it as well.
Yeah, they have been incredibly smart
about collapting these channels um to
get their message across and it is sort
of in some ways the female version of
going on Joe Rogan, but it has a much
smaller reach and there's a much greater
backlash to it I think because you know
if you look at the statistics Jenz women
in particular are not conservative
overwhelmingly and so if you're trying
to appeal to women especially women
under
being very conservative and emphasizing
roles as wives and mothers isn't
necessarily the way to do it.
>> It It's really interesting. I spent some
time reading new conservative women's
magazines. One is called Eevee and one
is called The Conservator.
And one of them had an interview with
Caroline Levit and it was praising her
for basically taking no maternity leave.
She spent very little time off the
campaign trail. And like look, I was
someone who was eager to go back to work
after maternity leave. So I've
absolutely no judgment on, you know, the
choices one makes around those things.
But from a party that is emphasizing
women's sort of natural, and you can't
see me making air quotes over this
podcast, roles as wives and mothers,
it's really interesting to see them also
really praising someone like Caroline
Levit for not necessarily putting that
first. So I think it's just they're
working out how to graft their message
onto a generation of women that has
clearly moved forward in some profound
way. Mhm. Well, one of the things I
wanted to talk to you about, you've
written about how this look combined
with kind of an aggressive social media
clips often leads to virality, right?
And that can grow into a national
platform. And so with Congresswoman
Nancy Mace, like she's considering a run
for governor of South Carolina, it seems
like
>> this formula could either work really
well for her or it could backfire. Um,
just for our listeners, like could you
tell us a little bit more about that
Nancy May story and what happened in the
beauty store? So, she is a supporter of
Donald J. Trump to the extent that on
her Tik Tok she has an entire library of
videos that are titled DJT with a little
American flag emoji and we know exactly
what happened cuz they were both
filming. So, the constituent asked sort
of pointedly, "When's your next town
hall going to be?" When
>> are you going to host a real town hall
for the people?
>> You did you miss the 15 I had last year?
>> That wasn't a town. when are you going
to host one this year?
>> And it sort of escalates from there.
>> Are you going to do any more this year?
Are you going to do I'm asking if you're
going to have any more town halls this
year? Any more that you're going to this
year or not?
>> She then says to him, well, you know, I
voted for gay marriage twice.
>> What does that have to do with you?
>> So, I'm just saying it has to everything
to do with you.
>> You think everything about me has to do
with gay marriage? That's your first
>> clearly sort of trying to point out to
him that like it it just it's like gets
pretty ugly. Like I don't want I can't
read her mind. I don't know what her
intention was there, but
>> because he's a man in the beauty aisle.
>> Yes, I see.
>> And he is, you know, I think confirmed
that he is gay. And then when she posted
it to her social media, she, you know,
said that he was basically like a
liberal maniac and that, you know, he
was wearing Daisy Duke shorts. And by
the way, those shorts were not that
short, but it was clearly like a dog
whistle about his masculinity and it was
not appropriate. I mean, the fact that
an elected official,
a congress person did that, I know that
we have lost the capacity for, you know,
disgust or shame or any of that, but I
even found that shocking that she would
do that. And so, it can be sort of a
turnoff even for people within your own
camp. you've seen even in very very red
states there can be a bridge too far in
terms of the sort of rage baiting really
out there conservative behavior. Um so
you know we'll have to wait and see.
Well, one of the things your piece and
kind of this discussion made me think
about is the fact that there's not
necessarily a cohesive uh Democrat
aesthetic. You know what I mean? Um, I
was thinking about how like the right
often kind of uses, you know, mockingly
the blue hairs as sort of describing
like woke reactionaries, people who dye
their hairs in crazy colors. But I
wondered if you had any thoughts on like
why it feels like the conservative
aesthetic of a woman is so clear and
clockable and why that hasn't really
manifested in the left as much. I do
think because they have such a narrow
vision of appropriate femininity. So it
is easier to have the trappings. Um I
think just it is more of a challenge for
liberals to speak in a uniform style
vernacular because part of the liberal
ethos is like wear what you want or have
more sort of individuality in terms of
your fashion or gender expression. I
guess should Democrats spend time trying
to make a female mascot akin to Caroline
Levit or Christine? Do you think that's
antithetical to what Democrats stand
for? Is it not something that they
should fight back with? Or do you think
the fact that there's no alternative on
their side is kind of a sign of what the
party stands for? I think there'd just
be no way to do it and have it feel
organic. It's like why we keep having
the discussion, why isn't there a
liberal Joe Rogan? It's like, well, he
wasn't built in a lab. He gained that
organic popularity and association with
right-wing ideas over time, and he
doesn't just talk about politics.
>> I mean, it's interesting to know that
one thing about a lot of these social
media platforms is that viral trends are
fickle and they can change very quickly.
Do you see, you know, in the near or
long-term future this kind of reward for
this type of aesthetic or even kind of
like political stance taking a turn? Do
you think like potentially audiences
might tire from it?
>> I I think they absolutely can. I mean,
you see a Tik Tok has 7 million views.
Well, you don't know how many of those
are hate views or hate comments. And so
there's not a necessarily a a linear
correlation between everybody seeing
something and everybody supporting
something. And so it could really have a
different outcome in terms of how people
are voting. I mean, you saw this with
Carrie Lake in Arizona, right? I would
say that she has that sort of same
aesthetic and that same really combative
approach and she did not win in that
state. So, we'll see what happens. I
can't predict the future. I I do hope
people tire of this cuz it is
exhausting.
>> And will you be buying matte or dewy
foundation?
>> I'm dewy. I just want to look like a
glazed donut all the time. Who doesn't?
>> Coastal Elite.
>> Coastal Elite Glazed Donut. That's me.
>> Jessica, thank you for joining me. It's
been a lovely conversation. Thanks so
much for having me.
[Music]
If you like this show, follow it on
Spotify, Apple, or wherever you get your
podcasts.
The opinions is produced by Derek
Arthur, Sophia Alvarez Boyd, Vashaka
Darba, Christina Samui, and Jillian
Weinberger. It's edited by Ki Pitkin,
Allison Brusek, and Annie Rose Stasser.
Engineering, mixing, and original music
by Isaac Jones, Sonia Herrerero, Pat
McCusker, Carol Sabro, and Aphim
Shapiro. Additional music by Aman Sota.
The fact check team is Kate Sinclair,
Barry Marge Locker, and Michelle Harris.
Audience strategy by Shannon Busta and
Christina Samui.
The executive producer of Times Opinion
Audio is Annie Rose Stasser.